we're in alliance Nebraska this is
probably the worst place that you could
ever build this in the winter
we'll get real high winds lots of dry
cold I think it averages daytime around
30 degrees Fahrenheit
it'll get down to it every year we'll
have days that are 25 degrees below zero
or lower Wow looks like you even lunges
yeah those are Eureka lemons
these are Valencia oranges they're the
juice orange this one it's a new type of
Mandarin the wood no no no we're near
the closest ones would be probably 800
miles in Texas or somewhere no no in
fact they thrive here we can probably
grow the best citrus anywhere in the
world at this latitude for size and
quality these are 12 months greenhouses
and we're wasting our sunshine in
Nebraska during the winter we're not
growing and and we're just wasting all
of this underground heat this is one of
the tubes coming out out of the ground
six inch tubes that go down eight-foot
deep and out and clear out into the yard
see where that asparagus is back there
it goes out about 90 foot back there and
then comes around and goes in there
seven of them come up on the south side
here we're just using the underground
heat underground stays a certain
temperature it's stable at 52 degrees
here so if you have a stable temperature
you can use that both in winter and
summer yeah and this blower here this
sets over seven tubes six inch tubes
that go down eight-foot deep and then
when the blower goes on it just
recirculates that air continually when
and picks up that ground heat so you're
just the energy are using is just to
circulate yeah just circulates the air
underground it only runs when it's 50
degrees or lower it draws seven and a
third amps is all and that heats the
entire place during the winter but just
about everything we put in rose real
well
these are figs here and they'll put up
this first crop then in the middle of
the summer they'll put out another crop
that's way heavier here's some grapes
and those are golden Muscat we've got I
think nine different varieties of grapes
they're all southern grapes northern
grapes they'll grow in here but they
won't fruit these are Thompson seedless
we're having to learn how to grow grapes
because it doesn't work the same here
that it does outdoors so all you need in
order to have these plenty was to take
advantage of the Sun and to go a little
bit deeper into the ground and to
combine the two things together
everything in the design fits together
you can't do away with any part of it
and come up with this efficiency the
sloped back wall this one's over going
now that it doesn't make any difference
but in the new ones when the Sun Goes
low in winter that wall will reflect
down on the growing beds you don't get
growing rays from the north so there's
no reason to have glazing on the north
so we get all of our Sun from the south
and above this is all lexan it's
polycarbonate it's three
it's inch-thick and this is twin wall it
has a little insulation value and not
very much but in the back wall that this
is the only one that has this open foam
the all the rest of them have galvanized
metal these are the little flame grapes
and then - we've got blackberries there
yo there's a pomegranate there and let's
see are there any fresh blossoms here's
here's one and in here some more we can
grow local plants and we can grow
tropical plants but sometimes local
plants don't like it as well
this tree is about 24 years old it'll
probably go for another hundred years or
so when we built the greenhouse was the
year I retired from the post office I
saw this units about 24 years old so you
initially had geothermal just for the
house yeah when we built the house 45
years ago we took tubes out through the
lawn that are eight foot deep and they
just circulate that 52 degree
temperature this is of geothermal tubes
for the house you can tell there's a
little indentation it goes right down
through here and then it goes into that
patio area three different points we
found out it worked so well for the
house that we could use it for the
greenhouse without the heat pump this
one is three and a half years old it's
called a tango Mandarin all picks out I
see when we started it we knew it would
work but we didn't know how well and we
knew that we had to grow something that
you couldn't grow here so that's why we
ended up with a citrus and I think we
have 13 different varieties now all of
them thrive most all of the fruit is way
bigger than
that was one fellow that had done work
in New Zealand
the only thing he could figure was that
it was a latitude but each each one of
these trees take up an 8-foot circle at
the farmers market price that we get the
tree will average about a hundred and
twenty-five pounds of fruit a year and
at farmers market that eight foot circle
will return four hundred and thirty
dollars and we grow above and below the
trees this greenhouse this one averages
about eighty cents a day year-round for
energy and the new design is way more
efficient than this
we always think we've gone about as far
as we can with the efficiency but I can
see the time when we could grow all of
the tables citrus on the high plains to
take care of this whole area the average
grower in Florida gets 46 cents a pound
for oranges we get 350 well they're
wholesaling them to a broker and if the
broker is selling them to a distributor
that they have to truck them from 1,500
miles the profit that we get off of one
tree they're going to have to have nine
trees people say that young person can't
get into farming anymore because it's
too expensive for the price of a
three-year-old four-wheel drive big
tractor like they have to have now we
could build nine of these for that price
I don't know how this is going to be
today how hot it's gonna be in there
because we just got it started and then
they went to Australia for two weeks and
she was in use to water and yep she's
watering now we just finished building
it about two weeks ago there's so much
cheaper than a conventional greenhouse
we tell people if they have access to a
backhoe and can do their own labor which
is easy because it just all slips
together it took two other six hours to
put the frame up we tell people they can
put one up completely automated for less
than 25,000 what they would put for the
heat system in a regular greenhouse
that muscle works pretty good doesn't it
yeah less than three weeks for the
plants and they took a shock when we
first put them in
so do you want to now serve a backyard
garden idea as well boy these things are
really taking off haven't they cuz
that's faster than we thought be faster
than just in the ground yeah yeah I've
planted some outside to experiment to
see which ones have done the best these
are way way ahead of the bunch outside
that's the geothermal tubes they go 75
foot out 75 foot across and 75 foot back
into the other end so you've got 230
feet of tube eight foot deep at that
length of tube we found that we'll have
enough length in the ground to pick up
the whole 52 degrees it's stable at 52
degrees here some places it's down to 48
49 some places like the one up at
blackhawk it's 62 because there next to
some Warm Springs so if you have a
stable temperature you can use that both
in winter and summer yeah we could use
it for cooling now that's what it's
actually doing I'll show you what it
what that peak is now okay it's 125
degrees it's coming out at 87 degrees so
it's really circulating see where that
white box is at the other end that's
worth all the 17 tubes come up and they
just circulate through but we're trying
to figure out whether it works best
better to push like this ones pushing or
pull air like this one has so when we
find that out we'll we'll use whichever
ism
to be efficient you've got two
thermostats one goes on when it hits 80
degrees it'll go on for the cooling when
it drops to 50 degrees it'll be for the
warming and the winter so you've got a
30 degree temperature range in there
where there's no fans on at all
so you're not using any energy during
that time in the winter I was a straight
D student but the only class that I
really liked was physics and a lot of
this is nothing but high school physics
that's a model of the new type see our
blower is at this end then the tubes
come out here and they go anywhere
outside 230 foot and then they come up
down in there and so four of them would
come in on this side and then we've got
two on this side and those tubes they go
out eight-foot deep 83 feet they come up
right in this bucket here eventually
it's going to have a better lid on it
see there this goes from here into that
entry room and it has a blower and those
are high-pressure blowers see this one
is the one that has the underground
tubes that will cool it in the winter
this room is completely isolated and
closed in the winter when it gets hot in
here this blower comes on and if it's
all closed it causes a vacuum and it
sucks
this air underground and it's pre cooled
and then it'll go in here then we suck
the air off of the peak off of the peak
that tube takes that hot air off of the
top here and it puts it in it comes down
and it's a foot deep underground here
down about a foot deep along here comes
up and goes back in up there and then
the blower just blows back it just
recirculates that heat and puts it in
the ground
so in the wintertime we store that
amount of heat in the past so we think
we can delay the fans coming on a couple
hours at night this is going to be a
pond
it'll have twelve hundred and twenty
gallons of water in it and we'll put
fish in it will float lettuce on planks
then we'll water out a bit out of the
pond
because official fertilizer doctor
punished if we had the hydroponic setup
we could go clear to the the end with a
trough in here and have this all
hydroponics flowing from this end back
into the pond there there's a lot of
geothermal research going on but at most
all of its grant research so the end
product is millions of dollars so it's
not for a market grower like this but
your idea is that people could copy this
or use this your research in your no
work right now we're working with the
company in Dubai and they're interested
in seeing from what we've learned if
they could use it for cooling at night
does it get cold on the desert day
because at night you would be able to
maybe put a little cooler through there
it might be that the tubes would need to
be longer I think there would be a way
to use these underground tubes to
ventilate the whole thing and not use
any outside air everything is automated
and that would be everything the blowers
and everything are on thermostats we can
monitor at all if we had the right
equipment we could actually turn blowers
on and off with the telephone we don't
have a pest
at all the only pissed we have our white
flies and aphids and either one of those
we can control with horticultural oil
all it is is a refined mineral oil on a
system like this Organic is the only
sensible way to go you can have locally
going organic for the same as you would
have outside if you were using toxic
chemicals the local is is really a
bigger selling point than organic in the
Sand Hills those towns are all drying up
all of these little towns that are
drying up have vacant lots with water
and power at the lot and it only makes
sense to put these in one this size like
Cody is a hundred and forty people you
could just about furnish fresh
vegetables year-round for a town that
size on just this size and then with
citrus you'd have even more no 85 and
you're still building yeah we were
retired for several years and then it
come to this
not as long as this as we've got this
going it's getting really interesting
now